---
title: 'Philosophy of offense in fighting games'
tagline: 'Like what even is a hit?'
createdAt: '2025-03-09T00:09+02:00'
tags: ['game design']
favourite: false
draft: true
wordCount: 2535
---

Meta note:

> Yeah so I'll probably keep this as a draft. There is something here, I just
> can't seem to put it to words.

There has been a lot of discussion lately about throw loops in SF6. Personally
I'm in the camp that is indifferent about them or recognizes their necessity,
but a conversation I had at my locals inspired me to write about it in a broader
sense.

Offense is one of the main ingredients in what makes fighting games distinct
from each other, but an under-discussed topic in my humble opinion. The FGC
seems to lack the vocabulary to meaningfully convey differences between games
and versions. The bottom line is that in order for the game to proceed, someone
is going to have to get hit. There is no way around that. Another harsh truth is
that the games are in the broadest sense of the word, symmetrical, meaning about
half the time, you the player are the one who has to get hit. People are
naturally [loss averse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loss_aversion), which
makes this a bit of a deadlock. Losses hurt more than wins feel good, which can
be generalized to getting hit feels worse than hitting and yet each player will
have to get hit about half the time. A typical way to cope with this reality is
to justify or rationalize why you got hit. If you made a mistake, and can learn
from this, it feels less bad that you got hit.

Different games and sometimes even characters within them have differing
philosophies about what qualifies as a "hit worthy" mistake. I will now go
through some examples in hopes of divining the true nature of offense in
fighting games.

## States of a match

In most fighting games, there is a flow to the match. We can split the match
into a handful of states and talk about how each game emphasizes different
states or transitions between them.

Neutral

- Neither player has an advantage
- Neutral ends when an attack makes contact
  - On block proceed to pressure
  - On hit proceed to combo

Pressure

- Intermediate step between neutral and getting hit
- Having to block is a sign of a minor mistake
- Either
  - Attacker opens up the defender, proceed to combo
  - Defender holds the mix, return to neutral
- In some cases the defender can abuse a gap and start a combo of their own
  - The existence of such a gap means the pressure was fake all along.
  - Fake pressure is a can of worms we will be leaving closed for now

Combo

- Reward for landing and a punishment for taking a hit
- Afterwards in order of desirability:
  - Round ends due to comboee dying
  - Comboer gets oki pressure
  - Return to neutral

Note that this structure is mostly linear. Most games go back and forth between
neutral `&lt;---&gt;` pressure `&lt;---&gt;` combo until someone dies. The structure from neutral to
getting hit is also often a two-step one. This allows for a bit of granularity
when it comes to mistakes. Going from neutral to a combo is reserved for bigger
mistakes, a combination of a medium mistake and an aware opponent or a risky
option that didn't pan out. All of these have an element of agency that help the
player getting hit rationalize why they are getting hit. Blocking a jump-in
instead of anti-airing is also a mistake, but a smaller one, so the punishment
is smaller. Another mistake needs to happen for the attacker to get in. This
structure also allows for character diversity. Rushdown characters tend to be
very good at initiating pressure, but not the best at opening up the defender
nor do they get the most reward when they do. Grapplers tend to struggle to
initiate pressure, but have a semi-reliable method of opening up the defense
with decent reward when they do.

I'll now explore how different games handle these transitions and attempt to
read from my tea leaves what that says about the philosophy of each game.

## Footsies

[Footsies](https://store.steampowered.com/app/1344740/FOOTSIES_Rollback_Edition/)
is a bare-bones game about well, footsies. In Footsies, you mostly get hit by:

- Pokes
- Getting [whiff punished](https://glossary.infil.net/?t=Whiff%20Punish) when trying to not get poked

In addition to the initial hit, the attacker needs to [hit
confirm](https://glossary.infil.net/?t=Hit%20Confirm) to get a round. The third
main way of getting hit is by punishing a failed hit confirm. There are other
systems such as parries, but they don't drastically change the formula.

Notably there is no real block pressure in Footsies. You are either in neutral
or getting hit. The game does feature blocking, but most concepts of pressure
such as [mixups](https://glossary.infil.net/?t=Mixup) and [frame
traps](https://glossary.infil.net/?t=Frame%20Trap) don't exist. There are no
knockdowns, the round ends when a player gets hit with a special move. This
means the two-step process of getting a hit is streamlined down to one.

Every time you get hit in Footsies, it was either due to hesitation and getting
poked, or due to misplaced eagerness and over-extending by either whiffing or
hit confirming on block. I would argue this translates to discipline. There are
no cumulative advantage mechanics or sudden movements. The option space is
limited and the characters are identical. There are no gimmicks or knowledge
checks to be aware of. The game is in a sense, pure.

## Strive

While not my favorite, Guilty Gear: Strive is my most played fighter, so I'll
tackle it first. In Strive, neutral tends to not last that long. It's very easy
to air dash in and get the party started or to use one of a plethora of tools
most characters are given to bludgeon their way in. There are also a handful of
characters with a lot of screen presence beyond up close block strings. Combos
tend to end in one of two ways, wall break, which mostly returns to neutral with
a resource boon to the comboer or with a knockdown setup. Most of the time,
knockdowns allow effortlessly restarting pressure and in some cases one can even
do so after the wall break, although those cases tend to be gimmicky and
character specific.

What this means is that by volume of time, the players spend disproportionately
more time in pressure situations over neutral. In extreme cases the round can
feature less than a second of neutral before a player gets a hit and loops
knockdowns until the round is over. Strive has an emphasis on pressure. In some
matchups it's nigh impossible to not have to block at some point, you could
think of Strive tilting the mistake ratios in the two-step case. The mistake
that forces you to block is not that significant, as that was almost bound to
happen. The mistake that Strive emphasizes is the one that gets the combo
started. This I feel is one of the less discussed areas as to why legacy players
dislike Strive. In older Guilty Gear games, movement is easier and there are
more ways to avoid getting touched with plentiful partial invincibility. In
Strive if Ky has 50 meter, there isn't that much you can do if they want to Stun
dipper RC their way in.

I'm not trying to glorify the past, from my limited experience with Xrd, I can
say YRC is bullshit.

So to summarize, in Strive's philosophy getting touched is not a big deal, but
getting opened up is heavily punished with not only the combo damage, but the
resource advantage and very workable knockdowns.

## UNI 2

I make it a point of agenda to try to bring up UNI as much as possible, as I
find it's approaches to various mechanics, systems and situations interesting.
I've mostly played UNI 2 (UNDER NIGHT IN-BIRTH II Sys:Celes as it's mother calls
it) and not that much of it either, but there are some striking differences.

The knockdowns are relatively weak. The defender can roll, vary their timing,
invincible wakeup options are plentiful and the attacker tends to not have the
most frame advantage to work with. The attacker is not toothless, just that they
have to consider lots of options and it is very easy to accidentally open
oneself up by autopiloting on offense.

The game has some ridiculously large buttons and it is very hard to not end up
blocking, however the game accounts for that. It goes about this in the most
anime-fighter way possible, by adding system mechanics. I won't explain all of
the gears that keep the clock ticking. All you need to know for now is that
there is a shared seesaw bar called GRD (grid) and a push block+ mechanic called
shield. Getting hit while shielding locks you out of GRD, which is bad.

In a lot of cases, basic defense is surprisingly easy. The game has a lot of
cross-up protection and high-low protection. You can even break some command
throws on reaction. If the protections were put into any other game with no
mechanical alterations, good players would almost never get hit. The game also
features long block strings that can be riddled with frame traps or kept
airtight, basically on a whim. For some characters, restarting pressure is also
not that difficult. The key to dealing with the massive attacks and relentless
pressure is shield. Successfully shielding an attack gives you some GRD and
changes the frame data of that attack to the point that anti-airing with shield
is in some circumstances a viable tactic. But with great power comes great
responsibility. If you shield in neutral, you are locked into a specific way of
blocking for about half a second, which means if the opponent predicts you are
going to do that, they can open you up. You also lose the ability to tech any
throws while shielding.

In summary, basic defense is easy, but will not get you out of the stickiest
jams. Using a shield to call out offensive habbits will be rewarded, and the
opening up minigame almost transcends to the shield baiting minigame. Instead of
trying to mix up the defender with overheads or throws, you are trying to bait
them to shield.

You can still open someone up with traditional mixups, but if you are just
looking at a stream of UNI, a lot of the things that look like nasty mixups are
not real.

The philosophy of UNI is almost three-stepped. The first step is barely a
mistake, just something that gets you to start blocking. The second step is
deciding on when you are going to shield. Waiting too long lets the attacker
build up resources and have more attempts at opening you up the traditional way,
but being too eager to shield can get you grid broken which can often be worse
than getting hit.

Whereas Strive emphasizes block pressure due to ease of access and the
repeatable nature of wakeup situations, UNI emphasizes block pressure by making
them more complicated and giving the defender more impactful tools to interact
with the situation. In Strive, if a mixup hits, usually only the attacker
actively did something. When a player gets their shield baited, both players
were active. The shield mechanic has all the active play of reversals without
invalidating a lot of the attacker's agency.

I just really like shield guys.

## Street Fighter 6

Street Fighter has an interesting reputation as the "fair and honest gentleman's
fighting game" (Please Capcom Dudley in six and my soul is yours). How this
manifests is that almost all damage comes off of punishes. Either on block or on
whiff. The mixups are not that rewarding and are mostly reactable. Getting
cornered and mental stacked and not reacting to drive impact is maybe the only
situation where I could reasonably argue that the attacker was the first to act.
Yes you can drive rush into an overhead and combo off of that on some
characters, but in general big damage comes from baiting the opponent to either
whiffing or using a reversal.

The philosophy of Street Fighter 6 is that getting hit should've been the
consequence of a proactive mistake you made. Then there are throw loops. One may
reasonably ask, that if Street Fighter 6 is about punishing proactive mistakes,
why wouldn't I just hold down-back and make no proactive mistakes? This is a
genuine question every game must answer to some extent. Strive deals with it by
cranking the defender's risc, chip damage, and plentiful resets. UNI deals with
it by largely the same means with slightly less risk of a mixup and more time
spent blocking. Footsies deals with it by guard breaks.

If there were no throw loops and like in SFV one could just take the throw, how
would the game change? Say that there was a four frame gap between the throws
when executed perfectly so that every character can jab out. We could accomplish
that by either increasing the distance on throw or the frames. If we do this,
that means there is basically no pressure after a throw. If walking up to throw
range makes you -4, that means you can really only do a far away button as
pressure and even then it's not going to be an overhead.

The block pressure in SF6 is a pay to win game. You either spend drive or end
your pressure. + frames are incredibly rare and most forward moving attacks are
negative if not punishable on block, meaning the pushback will handle longer
pressure sequences. If you take away throw loops and the pressure after a
knockdown is just hitting a cr.mk into a safe on block special, that changes the
game in lots of ways.

Fishing for a perfect parry on wakeup would be heavily encouraged, since the
only counter to it is a throw, which is now by definition fake. Throwing on
wakeup would only serve as a callout to PP, and going for it can get you
punished. A punish counter throw deals about the same damage as a jab combo from
some of the more privileged characters (roughly 2k), although the jab combo
probably has better oki. Not applying any pressure feels bad, but for many that
would be the correct play given that if they get parried, they can find
themselves on the opposite site of a similar situation.

Another option is to increase the startup of throws. This will then open up a
world of fuzzy jump timings, which would make good players nigh impossible to
open up.

You could introduce throw protection on wakeup, but in general SF6 streamlined a
lot of wonky systems like that and throw protection is unintuitive for new
players.

Eliminating throw loops would seriously lessen the impact of previous good plays
and make the game shallower.
