---
title: 'Lying in interviews'
tagline: 'What is the social contract anyways'
createdAt: '2025-01-07T10:01+02:00'
draft: true
tags: ['abstract']
---

This is not going to be educational, so if you're here for that, pick another
post. I'm going for more of a unedited and unresearched rant about hiring in
semi-creative fields.

I'm a software engineer by trade. I have a masters degree and experience in the
fields. Interviewing for a software engineer role is something I feel
comfortable at to the point where I've started making it a bidirectional
process. I intentionally poke at the interviewer and make them justify working
for the company to me, as opposed to me justifying hiring myself. If needed, I
can pick the right things to say and act like the perfect corporate drone, but
I've found that my mental health is better off if I can say what is on my mind.

Never have I been diagnosed with any form of neurodivergence. Self diagnosing is
a joke, but if I could throw a few darts on the board, I'd aim for primarily
dyslexia and secondarily some flavor of autism. Specifically the flavor that
makes me implode if I don't say what I think. It occasionally comes across as
either incredible confidence and bravado or arrogance and confrontationality.

In the hopefully near future, I would like to do games. Naturally the
straightest path would be as a programmer, working with shaders, UI, engine
parts or what have you, I think of myself as a generalist. The problem is that
games are a competitive field with a lot of applicants, meaning the companies
have options. On one hand, I could try the robot / drone strategy, and act like
an emotionless corporate cog, which feels like holding breath for an hour at a
time. Alternatively, I could say what I have to say, and potentially come
across as difficult to work with, a death sentence in a competitive playing
field.

One could argue the path lies somewhere in the middle, but hitting that is
easier said than done. Backpedaling is rarely an option, but I effectively never
have a sense of how the interviewer will take a given statement before
delivering it. There is no room for trial and error, nor can I understand the
rules of where one should show character and how much. What doesn't help is that
I'm not conflict averse, but in some contexts conflict driven. I find debate
makes me think learn. One should be able to justify any views they hold, at
least on some level and not take offense when it is challenged.

A 'should' statement eh, the root cause of disappointment reels it's ugly head
once again. There is no reason why anyone should justify themselves to me in an
interview, let alone someone who is holding all the cards in this interaction.
Intellectually I understand this, but emotionally it's not even close. Since
most of our decisions get made emotionally, this is certainly a dilemma.

So here we are, aiming for a red target on a green field and I feel like I'm
colorblind. Not only can't I see the goal, it seems to shift for each
interviewer, meaning I can't even reasonably iterate towards it.

For example, if asked about entrepreneurship, should I tell the interviewer that
I've thought about it to the point where I have a company name picked out and
I'm halfway through researching local legislation for starting the company and
that I'm waiting until I get an arbitrary but determined amount of buffer before
pulling the trigger and quitting my job. Should I lie by omission and say that
I've considered it, but haven't started anything concrete yet. A vague and
inoffensive answer that will show the interviewer that I'm considering my
option, a self-starter, but not too active that I may leave them in the near
future. This is a lie, but I'm sure some will see through my terrible poker face
and others will find even thinking of it a threat. Maybe through context and a
whiteboard, one could deduce the optimal answer, but I can't. Certainly not
without prep time.

Or if asked about previous experience with a specific technology that I have
used in a bunch of projects, but none of them are in a professional context. Do
I say that I have a bunch of school projects and free time toys I've made with
it, risking it coming across as incompetence or somehow less valuable, or do I
try to be vague about where the experience comes from and just mention some of
the things I've done without enough clues to anchor them to a project.

Or when asked about a specific project, my natural inclination is to talk about
all the things that went wrong and I learned from, but a laundry list of
failures may not be the most appealing thing to hear when trying to hire people.
I could give a marketing speech about what the thing is, but that will always
sound either forced and uninspired or like a bad 1990s infomercial that
exaggerates a problem so the 'fix' can seem important.

What all of these have in common is lying through omission and adding vagueness
to appear more professional. In a corporate setting where any individuality is a
downside, I can easily pick the correct options even though it's not necessarily
what I would like to do, but with games the fact that the field implies some
creativity, which implies at least a little bit of free thought, I find finding
the middle ground impossible.

There is no moral to the story, this was a rant. Goodbye.
