---
title: 'Making opponents look smart'
tagline: 'Designing human-interactive games'
createdAt: '2025-01-07T10:01+02:00'
draft: true
tags: ['fighters', 'design']
wordCount: 3899
---

As one of the greats, Tokido once said: "Fighting games are so great". I'm
certainly a fan. This post is written from a fighting gamey lens, but the
principles will apply to any game that facilitates direct antagonistic player to
player interaction. Fighting games just seem to be the medium through which this
is the easiest for me to explore. I've felt that this is my main problem with a
lot of modern fighting games and why I intentionally gravitated to Street
Fighter over games like Guilty Gear and Tekken.

What happens when the game doesn't consider how losing is perceived? You get
games like Strive, which make it really difficult to distinguish between someone
who is borderline mashing and a good player. I'm not talking about the hour zero
masher, but the player who has 50-500 hours on a character and has refined their
flowchart as far as they can. Obviously an expert player will notice and
completely dissect this hypothetical player, but when they fight a more
fundamentally sound player of the same rank, this rarely happens. In an even
match between a "single player gamer" and a fundamentals based player, the
single player gamer tends to come out on top. They usually have a steeper cutoff
between people they can beat (don't know the gimmicks and patterns) and people
they can't beat (do know the gimmicks and patterns). A fundamentally solid
player will lose more games to worse players, but they also have a better chance
to adapt and get a win against a better player. The cutoff is smoother.

A common example pattern is the jump back anti-air in Street fighter. There is
some natural part of the lizard brain that makes a lot of people jump forward
when the opponent jumps back, leading to some of the easiest anti-airs known to
man. If the flowcharter is abusing this, they will get a few free hits vs people
who don't know this trick, but when playing against a more seasoned player, they
are simply cornering themselves for free.

If we return to the equally ranked example, depending on the game, the situation
can be perceived in a couple of ways by the loser. Either they deem their
opponent a filthy skill-less maidenless masher. Alternatively, they may
recognize they are getting gimmicked and take it as their own failing, blaming
themselves and not the opponent. This is marginally better as it gives them
agency, but still not the best of solutions. The third way some games make this
seem is that they are getting outplayed because of a skill gap.

What I am arguing for, is that a game should make even getting gimmicked out
seem like the gimmicker is doing something smart, which they admittedly are since
it appears to be working for them. Not necessarily a valid long term strategy,
but certainly effective in the moment. Perceiving the opponent as smart will
completely change the mentality of the situation. In the first interpretation,
where the opponent was deemed a scrub, the dominant emotion is usually anger or
frustration. In the second case where the interpretation was a skill issue, the
emotional reaction is apathy or despair. In the third one, it is awe. Awe at the
game and their opponent. When a game makes even losing awesome, it is a good
game.

## But how

This is the tricky part. There are a bunch of ways to make getting beat look
rough, which is unfortunate as many of them also make winning look fun. We want
winning to look fun, but we also want to make the loser feel they deserved what
they got and that it was their choices that lead up to their defeat. They had
the agency, but for one reason or another it wasn't in the cards for them this
time.

A great example of a gameplay mechanic that does this is the slowdown in Tekken.
For those who don't know, Tekken will occasionally detect a situation where the
final attack has been started and there is nothing the loser can do about it.
The game slows down, zooms the camera in and shows how one of the two players
perishes. I've left out a crucial part, which is that it occasionally doesn't
work. What some may deem a bug, I see as a fantastic source of uncertainty.
Sometimes the slowdown triggers, but the player who was supposed to die evades
the attack and the game continues, both players get a clear view of what exactly
happened and this I think is what makes it seem cool. Simply looking cool
through slow motion also helps.

Another mechanic that has this effect is reaction supers from various games, but
since Fatal fury: City of the wolves (cotw from now on) just came out, I'll use
that as an example. Every super in that game is a double quarter circle forward
input, meaning the stick has to pass through at least six positions before the
move can come out, which usually takes about 20 frames if you're fast with it.
The cool factor here comes from the input. Dialing in the super fast enough for
it to punish after seeing a fireball is not easy, but what people can do is dial
the super in first and just press the button when they see a fireball. In either
case, the super will punish and the super user seems cool. Either they are a
freak of nature that cranks out super motions in the blink of an eye, or a
prophet that got a read as to what you were doing and churned the super before
you even threw the fireball. Either case, the super animation makes it pretty
clear what happened and with the super flash animation in cotw being before the
hit, it even has a brief moment of tension when you don't know if the super hit
or not. I'm sure I'm not the only one who checks the opponent's control schema
when getting reaction supered in Street Fighter 6 and then feel slightly grumpy
if the M is there. The fact that the supers in cotw require a longer input makes
them automatically more impressive and fun to lose to.

Another mechanic that makes the opponent look cool is the parry mechanic from
Street fighter 3: Third strike (3s from now on). Infamously that game features a
system where tapping forward a few frames before getting hit will parry that
hit, drastically reducing block stun and avoiding chip damage. This is extra
cool, because it mandates both the execution and the foresight of the previous
example. Obviously there is Evo moment 37, but what I want to highlight is
smaller situations. When out there playing with your buddy Jimmy and he parries
your anti-air DP, you can clearly see what happened and understand that Jimmy
must've planned for that for the whole jump, likely longer. The parries in 3s
are so sick because they are relatively accessible and clearly communicate a
situation where an outplay happened. Since the parry input is tapping forward,
you can get it on accident when doing a command normal, a special, or just
walking forward, but that doesn't happen often enough to diminish from the fact
that most parries are intentional. It's not a problem if the cool outplay
mechanic is sometimes unintentional, as long as the unintentional uses don't
cause the one getting outplayed to feel frustrated. In the context of 3s, since
the window to capitalize on a successful parry is so small, most of the time
when a parry happens by accident, the parrier won't be ready to take advantage.
And in the case they are, that turns back to being cool. Truly no way to use
this mechanic and have it feel bad.

So to summarize, there are three traits that allow a mechanic to make the
opponent seem smart. Rule 1: It must be clear what happened. Each participant
should know exactly what they did and why it did or didn't work out. Rule 2: The
action must be or at least appear to be a deliberate adaptation. The one getting
punished should feel like punisher took some specific action because they picked
up on something the punishee does. Rule 3: The action must be either
executionally impressive or psychologically impressive, preferably both. With
these three rules, a mechanic will make the whole game seem deeper and more
interesting and fun.

## Brief investigation of what we've discussed as it relates to modern games

### Street Fighter 6

Let's start with Street Fighters as I already mentioned it earlier, it has some
great examples like countering Drive Impact (DI). For those less familiar with
fighting games or living under a rock in the future, DI is a universal
advancing armored move, which can be countered by itself. The one who pressed
DI first will get their DI armored by the opponent, who will then have their DI
hit. DI gives a good combo on punish counter, which is what happens when
hitting an enemy out of the recovery of a move, such as their DI or pretty much
anything else. DI can stop a lot of "spam" and thus slows down the game
especially at mid level where I dwell. It's mostly a good mechanic for this,
but the fact that it can be used offensively as a reaction check as a part of a
flowchart makes it lose some points for rule 2. It's also a single button which
loses some points for rule 3, but you do have to be somewhat aware to do it on
time. I'll give it 1+0.5+0.5 = 2 points.

Another mechanic we should investigate is parries. The game features two types
of parry, normal and perfect. Normal parry is basically a block button and quite
unremarkable. Perfect parry happens when you start parrying on the frame of
contact or the frame before. There are two types of perfect parries depending on
if the attack getting parried is a projectile or a physical hit. Perfect
parrying a projectile causes your character to recover nigh instantly, which
allows for punishes on close range fireballs or closing the gap on a zoner more
efficiently. Perfect parrying a physical hit has the same benefits, but an
additional zoom-in and a slowdown that makes it very obvious what happened.
There are a few things that I like and a few that I dislike about this. The most
pressing issue is how a lot of the time you have no reason not to go for it. 3s
parry input prevents blocking, so going for the parry is a deliberate choice
that comes with some risk. In SF6 you can fish for a perfect parry while
blocking and in most cases there is little to no drawback to this. This fishing
aspect makes it lose some points on deliberateness, as higher level players do
it on autopilot. As with DI, landing the follow up after a perfect parry is most
of the time trivial, meaning the defender is incentivized to fish for parries
and then react to landing one. The attacker on the other hand will just
occasionally be punished for this with very little counter play. You can PP as
an anti-air or anti-approach or anti-block pressure or anti-meaty and in each of
these cases the attacker is forced to go for a throw if they want to avoid that,
but that leads to significantly less reward and opens the attacker up to way
more counter play. Parries will probably be the mechanic that most defines SF6
in retrospect, I'll say parries lose some deliberateness points for the
autopiloting, the effect is very obvious, execution can be tough if you're doing
it in neutral in reaction to a neutral skip, but even then the fact that
the input doubles as blocking does dampen that somewhat. 2.25 points

SF6 also features reaction supers, but since Modern controls exists, their
execution difficulty varies a lot. Very obvious, does require adapting to the
situation for most characters, comes with some risk but varying execution
demands, 2.25 points

All an all, SF6 scores pretty highly. The readability of the game gets full
marks, but it loses some with how simple and some of the drive mechanics are.

### Strive

A bit of a self own, but Strive is my most played fighting game by a pretty wide
margin and I don't think I like the game. I'm not a high level player by any
means, which is something that generalizes to other games and at mid level
Strive is a big part of the motivation for this post. I've played Johnny since
he came out, but before that it was Goldlewis and Potemkin. There was some Sol
dabbling in there, but it didn't really take. Johnny is a mid to long range
character who has a very fast and far reaching pseudo-projectile called
k-mistfiner. He struggles a bit on defense due to having no meterless reversal
nor particularly good evasion. I also do have to state that I've not played
Strive past season 4, so take it with a grain of salt.

The main problems I have with the game is a lot of really strong autopilots and
a few characters that have been designed in a way where the most efficient way
to play against them is pretty dull. The game is also quite snowbally because
almost any hit can be converted to a combo that deals good damage and once you
get in the meter gain skyrockets. The gameplan for a lot of the cast is to get
in once and never let go.

I'll never miss a chance to complain about Elphelt. Elphelt as a character is
designed aesthetic first for people who want a character that plays themselves.
Her main features are good range, a homing projectile that covers a lot of the
screen and chain lollipop, a series of attacks that for the purposes of this
rant is essentially unblockable. What really gets me about Elphelt, is how
uneven the effort distribution is, especially when it comes to chain lollipop.
She can jump away while throwing fireballs and then watch you dance and as soon
as you lock up, she can scoot up and start chaining lollipops. There is
counter play, but it's highly situational and predictive rather than reactive.
After some moves, if you think she'll do a chain lollipop, you can backdash and
go for a throw to make the first hit whiff. The Elphelt player has other options
for pressure which will beat out the backdash. After some starters you can 6p, a
semi-universal upper body invincible strike, but iirc that's range dependent and
you can't do it in most gaps, since the invulnerability doesn't activate fast
enough. Sometimes you can instant block, but the window to do that was made
pretty strict in Strive. Some characters have a reversal, but to do that in the
gaps is pretty hard even for those which only need to input a DP, and even then
it's a prediction which will get you punished hard if baited. Finally there is
YRC, the guard cancel, but that shares a lot of the downsides with reversals and
it doesn't lead to much even if it hits and it's always guaranteed to cost you
bar which you may not have. The commonality is that simply blocking a heavy
normal from Elphelt is terrifying because you have to either block out the chain
lollipop pressure or commit to a counter play option that will most of the time
leave you open for a punish if they simply do nothing or cancel to a different
move. Most of the counters are even pretty difficult to execute, while the
Elphelt player is just doing normal normal special like baby's first combo. The
asymmetry of effort here is more egregious than in most matchups, but not
isolated to her. I've never played an Elphelt that I thought was smart. The
character dictates an efficient game plan with little to no room for expression
of any sort and the best thing to do is simply to lobotomize oneself and keep
chaining.

As eluded by the previous chapter, my main issue with Strive is the systematic
drive to make defensive mechanics plentiful and generally neutered. The game has
push block called faultless defense, which is probably the best mechanic I can
execute consistently and even that is largely negated by how much characters
move forward with their basic pressure sequences. A lot of characters can only
do reversals with meter and a few rely on YRC. Instant block is unreliable and
mainly used to prevent push back to get punishes. Instant faultless is a joke of
an input for no reason. 6p has been standardized somewhat, but still there are
lots of gaps that some characters don't have the privilege of interrupting. The
fact that you can sometimes know the next four moves a character will do and
there is nothing you can do about is criminal.

To a certain extent, the identity of Strive is to be the turn taking slap fight
where you just gotta let them hit you for a while before it's your turn to hit
them. I'm also not saying there is no neutral in that game, although even that
boils down to rock paper scissors at my level a lot of the time and can be
easily circumvented with meter. Ky doing stun dipper RC to bludgeon his way in
from half screen is perfectly normal and a part of the smell of the game. Ram
keeping you in a corner for 10s where you just gotta block swords and sniff them
piggies is also a part of it. The unifying factor is that the game has really
strong autopilots and because of the combo system and RRC any hit will lead to a
snowball if the attacker is vaguely aware of what's going on.

Most of the mechanics in Strive make me think my opponent is either
autopiloting, mashing, or usually both. They are not really looking at the
screen nor are they doing anything particularly difficult. It's also not that
clear when something they do is smart, which is the point I'm failing to make as
to why Strive to me is so aggravating. With very few exceptions outplays are not
that visible, difficult, or deliberate seeming, so I'd be hard-pressed to gives
Strive more than a 0.5 overall.

### UNI2

The Strive rant may have you thinking I don't like blocking. This is not true. I
just don't like the helplessness of blocking in a game where I can seemingly do
nothing to prevent the big man swinging the coffin from chunking a jab's worth
of health each hit on block. UNI has strong defensive options as well as
stronger than average offense.

Meterless reversals are plentiful, but avoidable. Shield makes you interact with
the game even on defense. Chain shift gives you just enough time to confirm an
idea as to what was going on, but not enough to formulate a plan. It's all built
in a way where you can observe the game, form theories as to what is happening
and then take advantage of what you figured out. If someone is just mindlessly
autopiloting a blockstring, you can shield every hit which probably opens up a
gap you can interrupt or at the very least builds you a shit ton of GRD for a
chain shift for when you do get out you can make it hurt.

The fact that UNI options are not balanced around resource cost, but some
mixture of execution, understanding and risk make them incredibly interesting to
me. Yes you will occasionally get put in the blender by someone two zip codes
away, but at least you have your trusty D button that can do something tangible.

### COTW

Fatal Fury: City of the wolves or cotw is a few weeks old as of writing. Hotaru
is a demon, but besides that I'm enjoying it. The game is fast, but not fast
enough where you get lost. It has some great visual effects for things like
instant blocking, but those don't get in the way and it's the most motion input
intensive game in recent memory.

This is the game that turned me on a lot of concepts. Strive was my first, so
instant blocking felt like a waste of time most of the time. You got a marginal
spacing benefit, which was basically irrelevant if not in throw range or in a
very niche situation. In cotw, instant blocking is fun. The window is pretty
generous, there is a nice sound and visual effect, it recovers a bit of life and
doesn't crank your meter like regular block. If you're sick and nasty with it,
you can guard cancel to a special. Doing so is not something I've incorporated
yet, as it seems difficult, but it just feels good to do, largely because there
is no slowdown and you know you gotta be on point to get something useful out.

The game isn't perfect, rev blows are stupid in lots of ways. The armor makes
them hard to deal with in neutral and the fact that they don't reward you on
wild punish makes them feel inconsistent. I do applaud SNK for taking the road
less traveled and making all of them very different, since it gives the
characters identity, but I would be lying if I said I prefer them over drive
impact.

The high and low dodges are cool, even if they are a bit wonky with how they
work. You can only cancel the high dodge to specials when it hits, not on block,
which makes it less of a general poke and pressure starter and more of a
specific callout, but it's still a weird edge case. The low dodges are also
overheads, which makes sense as lows aren't that good so it's nice to have a
secondary reason for that move. The slowdown you get from dodging is a neat idea
and really emphasizes rule 1.

Overall, this game feels like it has a nice balance of standardization. Every
DP seems to work the same way with the light one being invincible, heavy one
having a grounded break point and the rev one being a better version of the
heavy one. It makes it easy to jump from character to character. Despite this,
they didn't standardize the fastest attack speed with some characters having a 5
frame move as their fastest and some having a 4 framer. There are also large
discrepancies around 6 frames with some characters only getting a light attack
while others can do heavy normal into a DP break. I was never around when the
old games we talk so much were happening, but I can see why someone likes a less
formulaic game.

## Notes

I feel like there is something here, but it would require a rewrite. Also a
chapter about other games like card games or strategy could be good.
