---
title: 'I push buttons'
tagline: 'Warning on the grind'
createdAt: '2024-07-11T23:46+03:00'
tags: ['prose', 'abstract']
wordCount: 1440
---

I push buttons in a respectable group. One with brand recognition, at least
locally. Pressing buttons seems to smooth over many undesirable aspects of life.
I don't worry about my health nor rent.

In the beginning with this group, I was ecstatic to press buttons. I learned new
techniques to press more buttons with fewer wrist motions and heard war stories
about how hard the buttons were to press back in the day. I felt like every day
I pushed buttons better than the previous day. I felt fulfilled and filled with
purpose. The collective was fantastic. There were occasional treats available
for all to have and joyous activities I got to partake in with my co-pressers.
Bread and circuses were well covered.

Over time I noticed patterns. Repeating beats that one ought to perform in order
for those in proximity to express gratitude. I noticed that there were some
buttons that needed to get pressed on regular intervals, but never quite
understood why. They seemed arbitrary and that this was more tradition than
rationale. This bothered me in ways I still struggle to articulate. The
organization had members I could go talk to whenever I was questioning my place
in the collective, and I frequently did. They helped me grapple with the nature
of the human condition and reminded me why I loved pressing buttons in the first
place.

Good things couldn't last. A plague here, some inconceivable numbers dancing
there, the collective needed to reconsider priorities. Not enough buttons were
getting pushed to keep everyone together. Sacrifices must be made. My
existential struggles remained, but there was nobody left to hear them. Nobody I
was willing to bother anyways. Unfortunately this made me reflect.

Initially I thought the problem was the buttons. I started developing myself
towards shinier buttons. Hoping to use these to fix the illogical repeated
presses I had encountered earlier. This didn't take, as based on rubric not
shared with button pressers, this was not feasible within the risk or work
thresholds.

Having reflected and looked within the world of buttons to no avail, I looked
around me. I saw co-pressers who had been with the association for much longer
than I, but with ability on par with mine get denied boons on the basis that
their methods were inadequate. Having witnessed first-hand how new buttons are
disregarded or even discouraged, this seemed contradictory. On the other hand I
saw my peers from school pressing the shinier buttons I dreamt of pressing and
being rewarded with my yearly boons every couple of months.

I started clicking switches in private. Maybe this was me branching out or
trying to see if I'm really a switch clicker at heart, but to my surprise I
found a sustainable source of joy in it. After a while I even started to
reintroduce buttons into the mix and even if they weren't the shiniest ones,
clicking them had this strange sensation of meaning to me now. I went as far as
to subject children to the world of buttons and to even more surprise found that
equally draining and fulfilling. Everything surrounding the buttons seemed
inexplicably interesting with the exception of my task of pressing the buttons.

I returned to the original organization and tried my best to press buttons and
got rewarded for this handsomely. I then tried working even harder, using some
of my free time to study pressing techniques I could apply, even automating some
button presses altogether. This time the results were different. No matter how I
pressed my buttons, it seemingly had no impact on the reception.

This lead to a devious thought. If pressing more buttons has no effect, does
pressing fewer buttons have an impact? Being the scientifically minded
individual I am, I tested my hypothesis and to my disappointment, no. I can
press buttons how I please and it has no impact on how the world around me.
Certain personality types could deem this the ultimate boon. Reward for no risk
or effort. Maybe I am unwell to think otherwise, but this is where the lack of
support fell short. Over time I started to grow annoyed at my inability to
understand my obsession. I couldn't bring myself to not press buttons, but
neither could I pretend to care for the buttons I pressed. Despite significantly
higher rewards now, I yearned for the days of being a young naive button presser
with the world ahead of me.

More experienced practitioners suggested that I should stop seeing the button
and simply focus on the effect it has on the world. One ought to seek the best
effect for the least buttons pressed and that the buttons themselves are
secondary. To a degree my experience with switches concurs, but this advice
never sat quite right. I think the disconnect stems from differing goals. For
someone who sees the various forms of rewards one gets from pressing buttons as
the motivation to press buttons, this advice must seem obvious. Like all 'ought'
statements, it comes with a set of unspoken assumptions. One of these assumes
the effects of the buttons are the reason to press the button or at least
relevant to the utility one gets from pressing, which in my case doesn't appear
true. I simply like pressing buttons.

I did take their advice for a while and tried to focus on the outcomes and
disregard the buttons. This lead my techniques rusty and my tools lacking. I was
pressing the same buttons the same way day in day out because it seemed like the
best way to optimize for what I was being asked. I saw how my co-pressers ended
up in their situations and felt it happening to me.

At this time I noticed this wasn't getting better. I was unrecognizable to
myself, angry at the world and everyone around me. Easily annoyed and snappy,
and with the summer approaching I figured that maybe the past stretch had just
been a bit too much. I had recently come to possess a slit of paper that told me
I was indeed capable of pressing buttons, which seemed redundant, but I was told
it was a highly valued piece of paper in some circles. Acquiring this paper was
rough for me, so the deduction that it had simply pushed me too far was
reasonable.

I scheduled a month of time, during which I was under no obligation to press
buttons. I lasted two days until the switchboard started calling. After several
high jinks and a remarkably low volume of button presses, that month had passed. I
returned to my station to resume pressing buttons. Due to my early takeoff, I
had landed before my co-pressers which left the shared space feeling eerie.
There were seats for hundreds of pressers, occupied by a handful. I didn't speak
to a single person the first week besides my morning greetings.

The return sparked many emotions within me. The first day went something along
the lines of curiosity, intrigue, inquiry, confusion, understanding, further
confusion, annoyance, recollection, despair, loneliness, discontent and finally
apathy and boredom. On the following days I've managed to skip the confusion and
start off around annoyance or despair. If anything, the break made things worse.
Nearly a week into my return I checked out my progress. I had completed 7 of the
9 units of presses our team had managed to complete designated for the summer.
As far as I understand, the others had been pressing these buttons in my absence
for at least two weeks. This brought me back to the question of our time, why
bother? None of the groupings of presses I had achieved were that impressive.
All of my presses could've been done in a single productive day, rather than the
four unproductive ones I had.

I hold no ill will towards my co-pressers, if anything I am upset at myself. I
cannot verbalize why I am bothered by the fact that my presses were inefficient.
It has no impact on anything. Maybe the fact that my co-pressers were
incentivized to dig themselves to a hole to reduce their options and make them
stay with the group for longer. Maybe it was how I saw others with my
opportunities thrive in their own environments. Maybe the initial feeling of
purpose I gained while learning the ropes or playing with my switches had made
me to think of the whole in a wrong light.

I am still pushing buttons. Unsure why. Probably not for long.
